what's up guys
i have talked at length about the
importance of sleep to achieve not only
your health goals
but your life and career goals as well
so now i've compiled some of the world's
top health experts to share their
strategies for getting
a good night's sleep and i promise you
if you give these tips a shot you're
guaranteed to improve the quality of
your sleep
which is going to improve the quality of
your life
tip number one rongin chatterjee shares
why your evening routine starts in the
morning
sleep okay i think this is
arguably the most undervalued pillar of
health okay because
in 2018 if you're not prioritizing sleep
you're probably not getting enough it's
just infinite distractions
right we all know that feeling where
we're still set up late watching
more and more content and again a lot of
great content out there but it could be
having a consequence
so i can tell you that the majority of
people
who are having sleep problems are doing
something
in their everyday lifestyle that they do
not realize is impacting their ability
to sleep at night
okay so my top two tips would be a
no-tech 90 try and have 90 minutes
before bed with no tech
right but the counter-intuitive one is
get outside in the morning
right a lot of people don't realize that
these daily rhythms
are set by light right you in order to
sleep at night
okay you need a differential between
your maximum light exposure
and your minimum light exposure so a
dark room
right has something called zero lux in
it looks as a unit of light
if you go outside on a sunny day for
about 20 minutes you get about 30 000
looks
brilliant so that's a really big
differential if you go outside on a
cloudy day
you're getting about 10 000 15 000 looks
right
if you go into a brightly lit office
a modern brightly lit office you're
getting about 500 maybe 1 000
lux maximum right so p everyone's
thinking about what they do before they
go to bed in the evening
but a life-changing tip and i've this
has transformed the lives of so many my
patients says
get outside in the morning for half an
hour even that will help you sleep in
the evening
okay what if i live somewhere super cold
and that sounds like
pain is sitting next to a window going
to work no
you've got to get outside okay okay and
i go through there
there's so many ways you can do this you
know in the uk
in january it's not that easy to want to
go outside it's dark
it's often dark till 8 am it gets dark
again at 3 30 pm
okay i will sometimes put my fleece on
right
and i'll sit outside and have my coffee
in the morning outside
just so i get that light exposure
because it's that fundamental to how we
are as human beings
we need natural light tip
number two sean stevenson shares why
your exercise routine
may be hindering your sleep and what you
can do about it
i like to start with the low-hanging
fruit first um
and something really really fascinating
is just simply
changing or embracing the time of day
that you exercise
can improve your sleep quality and so
appalachian state university did a
really cool study
and they wanted to see what time of day
exercising at various times of day how
does it impact your sleep quality
and so they had the study participants
to exercise exclusively at 7am
and another phase exclusively at 1pm in
the afternoon another phase exclusively
at 7pm in the evening
they compiled all the data and at the
end of the study they found that morning
exercisers
spend more time in the deepest most
anabolic stages of sleep so they're
producing more human growth hormone
they have more efficient sleep cycles
what we've been talking about
they also tend to sleep longer and this
is the one that
kind of can get glanced past on average
they had about a 25 percent greater drop
in blood pressure at night
so what's what's up with that that's
correlated with a deactivation
of your sympathetic fight-or-flight
nervous system right
so you're actually able to shift gears
get to that parasympathetic rest and
digest
calming down by getting some exercise in
in the morning
and so how do we employ this though
that's the question because some people
just like you know i can't exercise in
the morning
and there's also people who exercise in
the morning who might have
terrible sleep and it's because this is
not like the magic bullet this is a
thing to stack in your condition
if you're doing this and then messing up
the one i'm gonna talk about next
you're probably not gonna have the best
sleep so here's how to employ this just
five minutes and i tested this each
morning i do this five minutes of
exercise
you know it might be just jumping on a
rebounder you know a little mini
trampoline for five minutes
go for a quick power walk uh do some
tabata which is just four minutes
and a little mobility work and i guess
most people don't know what tabata is
high intensity interval training
basically is 20 seconds of exercise
followed by 10 seconds of rest
repeated over and over again for four
minutes and
in his clinical studies this was found
to outperform
you know traditional cardio like the
kind of moderate intensity
45 minutes of exercise in four minutes
wow
the change in your cardiovascular
benefits body composition
and also changing your mitochondria as
well this is why it works it does
something called a cortisol reset
all right we talked about cortisol but
again it's a good thing
if it's in the right time and the right
amount clinically i would call these
people tired and wire that would come in
i'm looking at the hormone panels
and the cortisol will be really low in
the morning and high at night
thus they have sleep problems so you
naturally if your
heart if your cortisol was on a natural
hormone rhythm it would be elevated at
its peak in the morning right around
6 am to 8 a.m and then gradually decline
as the day goes does that have to do
with what time you wake up
sort of i mean the cortisol will kind of
tend to nudge you out of sleep
but also we'll tend to notice that as
the day as it your sleep goes on
it becomes lighter and lighter anyways
right this is when you tend to remember
your dreams like
at the at the end of the sleep and so
getting this little boost like helping
your body to propel and get your
cortisol up via exercise helps to reset
that rhythm
and get you back on track so that's why
it works so that's number one
low hanging fruit just get in five
minutes of exercise start
in the morning no matter what just five
minutes is all you need
it's gonna help to create this snowball
effect of good things
for you you know five minutes if this is
the time you do go to the gym and do
your full workout
so be it all good but everybody who's
not already doing that
just get that five minutes in tip number
three
harpreet rye shares how to prioritize
sleep even
in a very distracted world going back to
that first year in investment banking
and thinking about the modern context
when we're not getting sleep
i know that while i'm a huge proponent
of sleep there have been times
where my aura ring has told me off for
not getting
enough sleep sure um and
i'll say that 20 of the time i'm
knowingly
reducing my amount of sleep and how do
you think about that as
as the ceo of a you know sleep
betterment company
yeah are there times where you'll
intentionally not get sleep because
there's a bigger priority
of course like goals versus sleep where
do you fall on that i think
there's definitely periods that we all
will have to go without getting enough
sleep
right i think that's inevitable um the
question is
how do we make people more aware of it
and more conscious of it
right and how do we also then once that
awareness and consciousness happens
choose to act on it even while on wall
street um
i ended up going from an investment you
know i was at morgan stanley for a year
an investment banking group i ended up
going to hedge fund for nine years
and i still worked really hard there got
more sleep luckily but
there it used to be hey i want to work
out i want to get fit
uh so i'd wake up at you know 4 45 to be
in the gym by 5 15.
so i often battled okay you know getting
enough sleep to work out
right and that probably actually led to
a lot of injuries for me
over the years i also think it's about
you know social activities with friends
you know it's natural to want to spend
time with people and oftentimes
you know everyone's sort of sacrificing
their schedule a little bit to do it
i think if you have families or loved
ones that can be another area where like
hey you got to take the kids to an event
or you got to take them out to a party
and they may throw your schedule off
but the big one i do think is work um i
think it's
there's a lot of people you know
probably a lot of your audience right
even
even me like we want to kick butt right
we want to get in we want to work hard
as the ceo of a company a sleep company
i'm like do i want those guys sleeping
an hour less and working on this to get
it out
on time or you know there's always a
balance and
i think you know we're not going to be
able to i would say change people's
lives
and you know not say prioritize those
projects or not
but we want to make people more aware of
it and that they can see the impact when
they are choosing to do it and then
frankly
come back and recover i'll have people
now that tell me hey man
i still go on those business trips where
i am back to back to back meeting
right nine to nine right and then like
maybe i brush my teeth and maybe i don't
because i'm that busy that night
right but then when i get back i see hey
it takes me a week or two to get back
and recover
and then i take it a little bit easier
at book less meetings then right
i tend to try to actually get that extra
hour of sleep and i'm not saying that
kind of behavior is great
but at least you become a little bit
more conscious and don't try burning the
candle
you know on both ends forever right um
so i think it's um
there's a lot of things that have
happened that we have abundance to
information
right you know look at look at google's
mission statement right
organize the world's information and
provide access to it sign me up right
i'm gonna
i want to always be learning i want
access to information you know facebook
right like
bring communities together bring people
together right there's more people that
we can meet
through social media write follow and
learn from sounds amazing but i think
also
in those two things right we we are
getting a little bit pulled away and it
in fact
is hurting our sleep um which eventually
actually hurts our productivity in the
long run
and what ways do you think that that
kind of stuff is hurting our sleep is it
just that we're allocating time to it or
is there a whole other host of
problems i think it's a much deeper than
just time let's take facebook as an
example
all right let's say you know when we
were all in high school and hung out in
one friend's basement right or you have
a couple friends over
all right we're hanging out we're
shooting the [__] right we're talking
about whatever we're catching up on you
know some cute girl in math class or
sports or you know some
the new york knicks game that just
happened but think about it this way
um every 10 minutes the doorbell's
ringing
you're hosting you're going up and
letting that person in making sure
they're comfortable making sure that
they have a drink
right making sure that they have a place
to sit and hang out with friends
introducing other people
what if that happens every 10 minutes
not just for the first hour
but for the next 12 hours right what
happens to
you right what happens to everyone else
in the room
right like it's just think about that as
a human i'd be like man you never
you never even get a chance to see how
you feel you never get a chance to
really spend time with your friends
right you're constantly being bombarded
so i think i think that's part of it i
think the same could go true for google
like
i love learning right i would say that's
like one thing i've always been
passionate about and why i like doing
different things
but if every 10 minutes something new
pops up
where like hey i was learning about this
i didn't get to go that deep and
understand it and something else comes
in
like you're just getting distracted and
so i literally
look at the numbers i'm a numbers guy
you know there's you touch your phone
the average person does about 150 times
a day
right so if you're awake for 16 hours
that's about 10 times every hour
that's you know once every six minutes
right so i think there's a deeper level
of
hey there's some satisfaction just like
the buzz you get the party when you say
hello to someone
that you haven't seen in a while and
you're excited but that constant
bombardment
right is is actually you know increasing
anxiety
right it's i don't think it's you know
we have abundant access to information
in people
and i think that's great but also let's
you know look at some of the other
numbers
depression all-time high suicide rates
all-time high lack of sleep all-time
high
right obesity all-time high and so i
think
it's not just that you're spending the
time doing it i do think it's a little
bit in the way we were designed as
humans
that's distracted us um and and i think
it's
ultimately you know taking us away from
our being conscious and being focused
what do you mean really fast what do you
mean that the way that we're designed as
humans is part of what distracts us
so i mean i don't i don't think as
humans you know when they look at some
of the network theories out there on the
brain and how it compartalize
information
you know really more than 50 people in
your immediate circle
like that you interact with tends to be
overloading but like
you know you have these different groups
right it might be immediate group family
and really close friends
then maybe one degree of separation and
it may be another host of work
right but now that that has 5x 10x 20x
right
um and i think like it becomes harder
for the human mind
right and even just from a social
anxiety perspective whether you have it
or not
to manage that as all these networks
grow so much
tip number four carl lenoir shares why
food timing is key how do you protect
your sleep
well first of all in order to manage it
you have to measure it
get some sort of an app i use a product
called sleep cycle
and if you use it with like a fitbit you
can actually see how low your heart rate
i mean my
my heart rate goes down to 40 beats per
minute in in deep sleep
i mean i when i the first time i saw
that i was shocked and so once you get
one of these sleep apps and you see how
you're sleeping
then you can start to do things that
improve sleep i'm a big believer in
any type of blue blocking glasses late
at night
don't eat three hours before bedtime
that's a big one
dr dale bredesen who just did some
groundbreaking studies here at ucla and
which led to the book the end of
alzheimer's uh
he is uh responsible for
telling people who have alzheimer's
disease to have three hour window
between their last meal and when they go
to bed
and that helped a lot resolving brain
inflammation
yeah yes do you know the mechanism
behind that
yeah autophagy explain for people what
autophagy is okay well
so so let me let me back up if your body
is playing host
to digesting food the factory is open
you're not sleeping well it's busy it's
doing things right
if the food is past the initial
digestive phases and moving into the
small intestine and soon the large
intestine which is what happens
within that three-hour window right your
body is now
on coast it's not working as hard you
could get into deep sleep
in fact if i have a meal late at night
for whatever reason you know i'm being
sociable and i go to sleep an hour and a
half
i don't get into the deep sleep that i
normally do and you see that because
you're tracking it in fact my heart rate
never goes down into the 40s it stays up
high all night long it's really
interesting well this leads to heart
attacks
you know all the people who are not in
good shape they have big meals they go
to bed they die in their sleep because
your heart needs that rest at night it
needs to like
slow the hell down and if you have food
the factory is open the heart is moving
stuff around it can't slow down
um so the other thing is that the
cellular waste management system is
autophagy
and this is when organelles go around
the cells and clean up metabolic debris
and turn them into things that can be
you know carried out of the body
autophagy shuts off when your body's
digesting food
autophagy is ramped up when you're
fasting like
they did a study that showed that during
fasting the autophagy in the brain
starts to clean up the plaque
that accumulates in some of these
neurological disorders parkinson's and
alzheimer's tip number five max lugavir
shares how de-stressing can improve your
sleep
and thus change your body shape there's
a newly discovered system in our brains
called the glymphatic system which when
we're sleeping actually
swooshes cerebrospinal fluid all
throughout
essentially cleansing it of these
proteins that aggregate over the course
of the day
they've shown that on one night of bad
sleep there's an increased level
of amyloid measurable in csf
cerebrospinal fluid
but then also you know i think dietary
change for most people is one of the
most difficult things to do
and it's particularly difficult when we
have our hormones working
against us so sleep i think is so
profoundly important because it acts
like a master regulator of our hormones
um it helps to
you know make sure that uh
we don't need to use our willpower very
often because you know willpower is sort
of
like this muscle that we need to use in
order to fight off cravings and things
like that
but with good sleep our cravings
diminish i mean they've shown that even
on one night of poor sleep
you consume an excess of calories the
following day anywhere between 300 and
500 calories
i've actually noticed it's a little off
topic but i
once one of the major breakups i had in
my life i
i noticed that i would feel way more
sensitive to it
when i was under slept you know you
become less able to contextualize
emotions when when you're under slept
on just one night of bad sleep a
metabolically healthy person will be
essentially pre-diabetic the next day
temporarily well yeah you become more
insulin resistant
so yeah sleep sleep i think is one of
those things that today we romanticize
being busy um but it's sort of like
the one thing that lifts all the boats
in your harbor
you know and yet we tend to undervalue
it um
you talked on your instagram about you
want to live
for a really long time or extend your
life forget exactly how you worded it
which got my attention
and then you said prioritize
de-stressing yeah
is that tied to sleep like what what do
you mean by that
well stress is an indiscriminate killer
and today
you know so many of us um are losing
sleep due to stress
um it's one of the reasons why one in
six adults now is on some kind of
psychiatric drug one in six yeah yeah
is on or has used um
well we're definitely self-medicating
and uh
and it's not good i mean chronic stress
is a major major problem
wow yeah so give me some tactics
how do how does one de-stress
you know i think meditation is really
important um you know i'm one of those
people that
uh i was trained to meditate um
i think this is really important i think
you know being being taught how to
meditate is as important as being taught
how to do yoga
you know we don't come out of the womb
knowing how to do a downward dog and to
hit
you know any of the number of yoga poses
that we're taught to do with a good yoga
teacher
having a good meditation teacher is very
um i think
is critical to knowing how to de-stress
i also think
um you know knowing
knowing what chronic stress is and
knowing what it isn't
uh is really important you know so in my
book i
differentiate between chronic stress and
acute stress
which acute stress is very beneficial
it's you know what we do in the gym we
stress our bodies
chronic psychological stress is really
toxic it's working under a boss that you
hate it's being stuck in a relationship
that's gone sour
by de-stressing and by um
you know doing physical exercise and
things like that you actually increase
your resilience to stress cortisol sort
of gets a bad rap because
it's related to stress but it's actually
a really important hormone it's the
body's chief waking hormone
so for about 45 minutes after you wake
up cortisol is the highest
that it's really meant to be throughout
the day it's part of the body's natural
circadian
hormonal ebb and flow and in that in
that window
for about 45 minutes after you wake up
that's a great fat burning window
you've got that cortisol spike which is
really working to
liberate stored fats stored sugars
for use by your body as fuel it's meant
as a way of you know
allowing fuels to become accessible so
that you can use them and
carpe diem right sees the day
within that window it's particularly
dangerous to
consume breakfast in its most standard
american form which is usually
rapidly digesting carbohydrates from
oatmeal granola bars things like that
because
that causes a spike in insulin but going
back to stress this is why consuming
carbs in the context of chronic stress
is so bad
because you've got cortisol chronically
elevated due to chronic stress
and then we're continuing to keep our
insulin elevated with the carbohydrates
that we're consuming
so this not only helps redistribute our
weight from muscle to fat
but also our our visceral fat which is
the most inflammatory kind of fat that
wraps around our internal organs
actually has about four times the
cortisol receptors
on it so this is actually why when you
look at people
that are chronically stressed out they
their bodies take on a very
uh particular shape it's
totally different from run-of-the-mill
obesity where people are just eating
lots and lots of calories and not
necessarily chronically stressed out
somebody who's chronically stressed and
eating lots of carbs in particular
they usually have skinny arms and skinny
legs but a bulging midsection
because their visceral fat is just
soaking up all the excess carbs that
they're eating
because of the presence of chronically
elevated cortisol
tip number six dave asprey shares why
blocking blue light
is not enough it turns out blue blocking
isn't enough to make you go to sleep
there's four kinds of light that mess
with your sleep and blue blockers only
get one of the four
so your melatonin will go up but the
other three are still there
so you need to block all four that's why
the sleep glasses are different than
blue blocking
so you see a lot of people walking
around blue blockers during the day they
got no daytime signal at all so that's a
bad thing
but if you're walking around under
bright leds and staring your screen on
full power all day you're getting an
overwhelm of daylight signal
so it's about getting it getting it
right but for me it's that hour before
bed where you just have to nail it
and for looking younger red light
therapy is profound for the scan
and what what do you use for red light
therapy is there a device
yeah there's a variety of devices so you
go to upgrade labs we have you know the
the many tens of thousands of dollar
whole body thing you kind of roast on it
with systemic effects including you can
actually see your nitric oxide levels go
up
on a spit strip after you expose the red
light it has biological effects
and then it's kind of the mid-range of
cost and performance there's a company
called
juve and they have a very very powerful
leds in an array
and then at the most affordable end of
things is
the true light stuff from the company
that makes the glasses
they're more affordable they have yellow
they have the red and they have
the infrared but they're not as powerful
of leds
so i would say you got to look at your
your your price point where you want to
go what you want to do
but it's an led therapy kind of thing
and you know jude makes a little box
you can take with you and there's panels
you can string together
the bottom line is if you're feeling
weird in your stomach and
you have nausea or you have a headache
and you put red light on your stomach on
your head
it's shocking what happens there's
studies of putting
red light in conjunction with ketosis
and
they looked at somewhere in minnesota
they looked at say a dozen
people they put them on a strict keto
diet they put
them on red light therapy with a stroke
keto diet and a standard diet and red
light therapy of the standard diet and
the
men who were on keto plus red light
therapy had a doubling of testosterone
production
but keto alone and red light alone both
bumped it up but nowhere near as much so
there's synergistic effects between keto
and red light which is
really cool is there a timing of that
like when do you want your red light in
the morning in the night
um generally you just think of sunset
and some eyes
okay so you would do when you wake up
two before bed and during the day if you
if you have time you know and you're
looking at skin repair or something you
can do it any time during the day but
the two peak periods are
before bed and upon waking tip number
seven
michael brews shares why cannabis is
effective for sleep
and lately my most my biggest interest
lately has actually been about cannabis
in sleep
i would argue that ambien is going to
have a really big competitor
it's called weed and it's out and
it's recreational in a couple of states
i live in you know california
and it's very very interesting do you
smoke
sure interesting absolutely what do you
find that it does to your sleep
so it depends on when you smoke it what
you smoke and how much you smoke
so it's all there's a lot of different
things out there but i've written
extensively
about if you're going to use marijuana
to help you sleep what should you look
for
i've also broken down the cannabinoids
so a lot of people out there talking
about cbd
cbd cbd right let me be clear you'd have
to have almost 200 milligrams of cbd to
have any effect on sleep
much lower dosage to help with pain you
want cbn
okay cbn which turns out to be oxidized
thc
helps with sleep much more at least
that's what the data would suggest
so how does one oxidize thc
you let weed lie around for a little
while and it's basically cbn is old weed
now to be fair people are learning how
to process it and make that process move
quicker
but what we're starting to see is now
we're starting to see cannabis
like if you go into a cannabis
dispensary and you say what have you got
for sleep
they have a section right like when
people my age 50
51 years old or walking into a
dispensary we're not going there to get
high
we're going there because we got pain we
have sleep issues and we
want to use the medicine right that's
where the gold
is and so when you start to really look
at it like let's treat it like a
medicine
let's look at it in a way that can be
helpful i mean we have an entire
endocannabinoid system in our body that
isn't being used except for
with cannabinoids so and also to be fair
cannabinoids are in many other things
besides marijuana but
they're really in marijuana so why
shouldn't we start to walk down that
path
create that technology and help more
people all right so you've said that if
you're gonna drink alcohol stop three
hours before bed
what's the protocol with weed so i think
it's gonna be different and to be honest
with you i don't think i know yet
um it's definitely something that i'm
studying and i'm learning more
more and more about but i would argue
that the tinctures like the the liquid
that comes in the droppers that you can
do sublingually i would say that would
be a place to start i haven't heard of
that
oh you just drop it under your tongue
yeah you just take it drop it underneath
your tongue let it sit there
60 seconds swallow it close your eyes
all right guys thank you so much for
watching this episode i really hope that
these tips help you as much as they have
helped me
sleep well my friends and be legendary
take care
thank you guys so much for watching and
being a part of this community if you
haven't already
be sure to subscribe you're going to get
weekly videos on building a growth
mindset
cultivating grit and unlocking your full
potential